All right.
So picking up where we left off in the last lesson, we learned how we could programmatically categorize
or group our records by some field, and I'll just jump back over to the spreadsheet to give you a quick
visual reminder of what that looked like.
So here in the spreadsheet, we had taken a lot of data with lots of columns or fields, right?
And we basically collapsed that all down to just two fields where we were grouping all of the data by
state and then showing by state.
What were the total salaries right of all the people in those particular states?
And so we were able to reproduce programmatically this type of structure in code, and we'll just kind
of review how we did that.
Let's see here.
So let me see.
So, yeah, I mean, so you know, well, let's let's just walk back through this whole little bit again,
right?
So here are all of our records basically right from this line.
This line is going to spit out all of our records.
We're skipping over the header line and then we are going to convert each record into an array.
And then here we're going to convert each array into an instance of a person.
And the only reason we're really doing this, this is just to make it a little bit easier for us to
refer to the individual fields or columns by meaningful names.
That's that's a big part of why we're doing it and the fact that the Streams API kind of sort of assumes
that you're usually streaming over objects that are modeled, right?
So here we are with an object that's modeled or many objects that will be modeled, right?
And so we're mapping the individual elements of an array into the fields of a person, right?
So we're converting the array to a person and then we're able to tell the Streams API to collect all
of those, all of those people essentially and then let us group them.
And in this case, we're saying grouped them by state, OK, and the grouping by method or function
is ultimately going to return a Java collections map.
All right.
And so here we're allowed to specify what type of map we want to use.
So by default, if we don't specify that it's going to return a hash map, but if we want to use some
other type of map and in this case, we decided to use a tree map so that our map entries would be alphabetized
by key, right?
Which in this case means the state by state.
So we decided to use the tree map there, right?
And then finally, it asks us, What do you want to do with the individual records after we do the grouping,
right?
And so we decided to use this hybrid thing here that lets us do a couple of operations.
So we first will sum up all of the salaries of all of the people per state.
Right.
That's what we're doing here.
And then right, and that's why we're using this collecting.
And then and then take that sum by state, take that sum and then pipe it over here into this method
reference, which is using a currency format or a number format or with a currency instance so that
we can format that salary as money essentially right.
And that will become a string.
Now, OK.
And so again, you end up with this, this structure, and it will look pretty much exactly like this
more or less.
Right now, the thing is the thing that we're getting out of this out of the streams API call here is,
of course, it's not a picture, right?
It's it's it's data.
OK.
So just I hope you'll all be able to understand that somewhat right?
Like here we're looking at a at a visual representation of data, right?
Here we just have the data, right, there's not really a visual representation of it other than like
where we're calling this for each year.
And you don't have to do this.
And I mentioned before that in most professional programming in Java, you wouldn't typically be printing
something out on the command line anyway.
You'd be sending the raw data.
In this case, that would be the map.
You'd be sending that map or whatever the output is to some other system.
And ultimately, you would you might render that data out on a screen inside of a bigger application,
like a web application where you've got a web interface, and maybe it would display as a table somewhat
like we have here, right?
But the data that's coming out of this would just be the data, right?
It wouldn't be a picture or something graphical or visual.
OK, all right.
So sorry for the long review, but I thought that might be an order because now we're about to crank
it up another notch.
OK.
So interestingly, here, we don't have to just stop here by just doing the grouping by one field.
We could actually keep grouping.
And I want to show you what that looks like because again, that may not be obvious to those of you
who have never done anything like this, particularly with a spreadsheet.
So let's jump back over to the spreadsheet.
And I think what we will do first is let's untied the the columns that we were hiding.
So I think I can come up over here and.
Untied columns.
There we go.
Let's see, did it get them all?
Yes, I did.
OK, so we've unhidden the columns, and let's also re expand all of these categories.
OK, so now we can kind of see all the data again, right?
So let's say that in addition to grouping all of these records by state and getting the what is it,
the salary total here?
Let's say that we also wanted to know what is the total salary by gender, by state?
Right?
So not only do we want to categorize by state, we also want a sub categorization under that by gender.
So in other words, we want to know how much money in total.
Do women in each state make vs. men in each state?
OK, so that's like a second level of of categorization or grouping.
OK, so first, let's do it here in the spreadsheet so that you can see visually, what will that look
like?
OK, and then we'll do it programmatically.
So it's actually pretty easy.
What we can do here is in this particular program, Apple Numbers and Excel can do this as well.
But in this program, I can come over here to the Organize website.
I just closed it there.
And we're seeing here where we already are grouping by state.
OK, so that's what it's showing us here.
It's grouping by state.
But I can come down here and add another category as they're calling it or a grouping, OK?
And so let's see.
So, yeah, I want to add a secondary category for gender so I can come here and select gender right
there.
And look at that.
OK, so now we've got females and males, right?
And if we scroll over now.
Now, we're only seeing the thumb totals for the state still.
But if I come down here to the gender header, any one of them this one or that one, right, if I come
over here to this gender header and click that thing again and now I can do a sum again.
Now it has added the sum total by gender for each state.
Right.
And it's done that everywhere.
So now if I come back over here and collapse, let's see.
Let's collapse all the gender info.
Right?
And again, just to make this a little easier to see, I will hide.
A lot of these columns as well.
OK, I'm not going to hide the ones to the right, we don't care, but at any rate now we can see the
totals by gender for each state, and I guess I could format these again as well.
Let's go over the format and set that to currency and turn on the separators.
There we go.
And it will close that out.
OK, so there we go.
So now we're seeing women in Alabama total two hundred and fifty eight thousand four, our data set
of only 100 records.
Right.
And men totaled three hundred ninety five thousand right.
And if I were to add these two up, that should add up to this number here for the entire state.
OK, so that's what it would look like if you were to add a secondary level of categorization or grouping
by and and you could just keep adding these categorizations if it made sense to do and they would just
keep inventing visually here, right?
So now let's go do the equivalent of this encode.
All right, so here we are back in the I.D. and again, this is going to be relatively easy to do.
So what we can do here?
Here's our first grouping.
Right, and so we're saying group by state.
And then here's what we want it to do with the resulting records of that grouping.
We wanted to add them up and then format them basically right?
Do all of this.
Well, if we want to add another level of grouping, what we'll basically do is just replace this bit
here because this is the part where we tell it what to do with the resulting records after the after
this grouping was done.
So now what we're going to tell it is after you're done doing this grouping, do another grouping.
Right?
So we're just going to replace this with another grouping.
So let me show you what that looks like.
So I can just hit enter here and I can literally just invoke another grouping by.
Right?
It's it's actually pretty straightforward, really, except for one thing now.
Now, in the spreadsheet, our secondary categorization or grouping by was done on the what did we use?
We use the the gender right gender.
OK.
So here though, we have not modelled gender as part of our person class, right?
So we need to add that in.
OK, so that's the first thing we need to do.
So let's do that real quick.
So what I will do here is this go back up here to the definition of our person recorder class, right?
And I'm just going to add another field for gender now in the spreadsheet, gender is modeled as just
a single letter F or M, right?
So let's let's model this a little more accurately if you want to think of it in this way.
And by that, I mean, let's not use a string as we did for the state codes.
Let's use a character.
OK?
To save on space and things.
All right.
So we can model this as a character KTAR, right?
I'm using the lowercase character, though, which is the primitive character rather than the class
only because in the end, it doesn't really matter all that much in many cases.
But you should know now that primitives will always be leaner and and make less use of memory and use
up less memory than their than their class counterparts.
Right.
So I could do a primitive character like I'm doing here, or I could do a class character like this,
but the class character will use up more space because it's a full class, right?
It will create full objects with methods and all kinds of stuff, right?
And we'd have one of those for each of the five million records, right?
So that would, you know, use up a little more space in the memory, so it'd be a little more polite.
I will just use a primitive character, but functionally speaking, it doesn't matter much.
And then I'm going to name this field gender, and as soon as I do this now, I get red marks down here
where we're creating a new instance of a person because now I'm incomplete in specifying all of the
fields to create a new person, right?
Each of these fields is required.
Right.
And so now I need to add in the, you know, setting the the gender here.
OK.
So let me put a comma here.
Now, let's see here.
So this is going to have an index and let me jump back over to the spreadsheet and determine what index
this would be out of our array.
If you will recall when we were doing this before?
Oh yeah, I guess I need to untied the columns real quick here.
Let's unwind all columns, OK?
If you will recall, each record here gets converted into an array and.
And each column or field of the record corresponds to an element in the array.
So we need to determine again which what is the index of the element for the gender field?
Right.
So this would be zero one two three four five.
OK, so gender would be index five.
Right?
All right.
So now that we know that we can reference a five?
Like so now this is not going to work just this way, though, because this by default is an array of
strings and we have modeled our gender as a character, so we need to convert this string here into
a character.
And that's actually quite easy to do in this case.
We can simply use a method on the string class called character add or care at right, and we're going
to just grab the presumably the very first character in that string, which would be character zero.
And now we have a character.
OK, now you might want to be a little careful in real life.
And in fact, you know, a hero.
I'll be real careful.
I'll be a little more careful even here.
So you could have a situation presumably where let me expand this.
You could have a situation where maybe there was an extra space or something in that field, right?
If you don't trust the data and how clean that data is, like, maybe someone put spaces or things like
that, then you.
We have learned that you could always call strip.
And then you could do the character.
And so that strip method would just strip off any leading and trailing spaces, right?
Just to make sure that you are just dealing with the actual data and know miscellaneous spaces and things
like that.
So you could do that.
And that would actually apply to any of these elements from this this array, right?
I'm just not doing that because I happen to know that my data set here is already clean and I'm not
real worried about it.
But in real life, you probably would want to do that, especially if you're not in complete and total
control of that data like you don't know where that data's coming from.
All right.
So anyway, now we've populated this new gender field, right?
And so now we can come down here and say, after you're done grouping by state, do another grouping
right group by person gender.
Like so OK.
And then just like we're doing the grouping by up here, we can specify additional things about this
grouping now if I don't specify anything else here.
By default, this secondary grouping is going to group by gender.
And then it's going to spit out those records again.
Right?
Like just the the records for all of the females for that state and then all of the males for that state
right now.
That's not what we want.
We want to continue to add up all of the salaries for each of the genders, for each state and then
format them as well, right?
We don't need the tree map.
I could put that in there.
But as I mentioned before, that that second option there is optional.
We don't need it.
So if we want to now add up everything, we can just put a comma here and then we can do what we're
doing down here.
And in fact, this bit here is no longer valid in this location because this was inside of our original
grouping by.
And now what I'm going to do is I'm actually going to select all of this collecting business here.
It's not that much.
And I'm actually going to just cut it and paste it right here.
So now we're just saying do the adding and formatting after grouping by gender?
Right?
That's what we're doing here.
Let me also just kind of reformat the code a little bit so that it might be a little clearer if if there's
any ambiguity still right.
So I'm I'm inventing the grouping buys here a little bit better, and I guess I could even take this
collecting thing here and do that and then maybe even take that and break that out there and this one
and break that out as well.
I don't know if that's helping anybody, but it might help you to just be able to see a little more
clearly here, right?
So first, do this level of grouping by state, then do a secondary level of grouping by gender, then
take all of the records for that.
And do two things right.
That's what this is allowing us to do.
Do to do two things here.
Sum them up and then format them right.
That's what this is allowing us to do.
And again, if we didn't care about formatting and all we wanted to do was just some, then I could
just take this something and just put it here, right?
And we wouldn't have a collecting.
I'm only using the collecting.
And then because I want to do two things, I want to sum up these salaries and then I'm going to take
those sums, which will be numbers, and then I want to format them as currency.
And that's why I'm using the collecting.
And then, OK.
And so now you can see the pattern pretty quickly, so it pretty easily.
So if I wanted to do a third and a fourth and a fifth level of grouping, I could just keep nesting
bees, right?
I could just keep going person and then pick some other field, right?
If I had other fields that that made sense to do that with right, and I could just keep nesting those
groupings in in that way.
Right?
All right.
So now another thing this for each bit here where that I was using really just to visualize the data
in a somewhat nice way is going to make less sense.
Now, in fact, actually, as it edges as it is currently written, it won't make much sense at all.
The first part, the state that part will work, but the second part will not right.
Because originally, before making these changes, we had a map of strings, two strings.
Now, though, we have a map, we actually should even say What?
So actually, why don't you try to anticipate?
What is the output of this dot collect call now?
Can you anticipate that?
Why don't you take a moment and really study this?
And guess what will be the output of this collect call as as as we have the code now?
OK.
Did you get it all right, so let's let's analyze it, so we know that this grouping by is going to
result in a map of strings, right?
Because we're going to have the state in the state is a string, a map of strings mapping strings to
something else, right?
So I've said in the past that the grouping by method returns a map.
OK, so this first grouping by is going to return a map of strings to whatever this outputs.
And we know that this is another grouping by.
So we know that that's going to output a map of something also.
So we are going to have a map of strings to another map.
OK.
And now this other map is going to also have whatever the data type is for this.
What is the data type for this?
It's character, right?
Gender is character.
So this will be a map of characters too.
And then whatever the output of this is which we've already seen before, it's going to be strings,
right?
Because we're going to have here the numbers, which are long.
But then those are going to be passed into this call here, which no format is always spit out.
Strings, right?
So let me see if I can just show you this somewhere real quick.
So ultimately, we're going to have a map of strings, which will be the state.
I'm just going to cheat and show it to you in this way.
A map of string.
What a map of string to.
A map of.
Characters, which will be the gender.
To string, which will be the salary, actually, in fact, I should say formatted.
Salary.
OK, so that's what we're going to have here.
Let's look at that again.
A map of strings, which will be the state's two maps, right?
A map of strings to maps.
And then the internal map would be a map of gender characters to strings, which are the formatted salary
OK?
So because that is because now the return type is going to be this nested mapping a map inside of a
map.
I'm not inclined to even bother trying to use this for each business anymore.
I mean, we could adapt this.
I could change this bit here to be whatever map stuff or something like that.
But what we what we would be showing here, I'm not inclined to even try to format that in some kind
of a nice way because it's a map.
It's just going to be a map, right?
So I'm inclined to simply go back to just printing out the result in a more raw format.
It won't look pretty, but it will have all the data there, right?
And so that means we want to go back to just capturing the output of this dot collect call.
Right.
So the easiest thing to do in this case, in my opinion, would be to finish off this whole dot collect
again with a semicolon.
All right.
And then I guess I'll just comment that for each out, because that's no longer valid.
And then if I put my cursor here around this at the end of this dot collect call, I'll just capture
another variable, right?
So another option command V..
And I'm going to just still call it result.
And the reason I did it this way with just capturing the variable is because I'm just making the I.D.
figure out what the data type should be.
Right now, it went explicitly here and decided to say that it's returning a tree map rather than a
generic map and whatever.
Normally you'll you'll typically want to prefer the most generic interface that you can in your declaration
of your variable data types, but whatever.
All right, so.
So this is saying we're going to get back a tree map of strings to map of character string, right?
Now notice here.
The generic data type is capital character instead of lowercase character, and that's just because
of the way that generics work.
Generics cannot actually have primitive data types, so it will so, so Java will map those primitives
to their class wrapper type.
OK.
Just for the generics business.
All right.
But yeah, let's see.
So that should pretty much map up with no no pun intended to what I said down here.
Write a map.
So this is tree map.
I said, map.
In fact, here, let me just bring let me bring that up.
Here.
So map of string to a map of character to string.
Right?
So yeah, we've got we've got all of that there.
And it's called result, right?
And so then we can come down here and uncomment this line.
Thirty seven, where we were printing out the result.
In that way, we can let it just print out the new monstrosity of a map of a map, right?
OK.
And so now we can run this guy.
All right, so let's see what we've got here, so we've got Arkansas women or females in Arkansas made
one point nine billion dollars and men made one point nine.
Also interesting looks like the women made a little bit more rate one point nine three one to one point
ninety seven Good for the ladies, right?
We always hear that the ladies are getting paid a little less usually.
But apparently in Arkansas with this fake, I guess it's a fake data set.
The ladies made a little more so good for them than in Alabama.
The women made six six point zero zero seven billion and the men made six point zero one three.
Right.
So they're the men made a little more.
And I guess this is Arizona.
So, yeah, so we can see what these people are actually making in each of these states grouped up by
gender now, right?
So that's pretty cool.
Let's see.
Now, I just want to be a little bit clear on another thing here.
I'm showing you these examples based on just adding, but just keep in mind this function that we're
calling here, whatever function we're calling at this point, it can be just about anything, right?
So in this case, I'm summing, but we could average right.
We could.
We could average.
These lungs just like that, just that easily, right?
Again, you could go look at all of the various methods that exist on the collector's class and and
have lots of ideas for other things that we could do not only here, but just in general, right?
So you don't have to just do something right.
You could do a lot of different things here.
Plus, I think in the next lesson, I will show you a way that you could do even other functions that
don't explicitly exist on the collector's class.
If you can think of some other way that you'd want to do things with that data.
You could implement your own.
You can implement your own operations.
All right.
So, yeah, I think this is basically what I wanted to show, though, the fact that we connect these
grouping by clauses here and you can theoretically go as deeply as you want to, as long as it's meaningful
for what you want to do.
Right?
All right.
So I think that's going to wrap up this lesson and I will see you in the next one.